layout: page
title: "Session 01: Introduction to the Big Book Step Study"
permalink: https://rpjonjubilee.github.io/sa-big-book-study-guide/01-introduction-to-big-book-step-study

Why Should a Sexaholic Study the Alcoholic’s Book?

This meeting is a step study, narrowly focused on the steps as presented in Alcoholic Anonymous’ primary text Alcoholics Anonymous aka. the Big Book. AA’s primary text is also Sexaholic Anonymous’ primary text as it says in our White Book:

The books Alcoholics Anonymous and Twelve Steps and Twelve Traditions (the Twelve and Twelve) constitute the basic texts of the original Twelve Step program. This section [of the White Book] is not intended to be a comprehensive exposition of the Steps. (SA p. 77)

The AA Big Book is the comprehensive exposition of the Steps. Why focus on the Big Book? It was written:

To show other alcoholics precisely how we have recovered is the main purpose of this book. (AA forward to the first edition)

In the experience of those early AAs:

Those who do not recover are people who cannot or will not completely give themselves to this simple program... If you have decided you want what we have and are willing to go to any length to get it—then you are ready to take certain steps. (AA p. 58)

The purpose of this meeting is to study that “simple program” and those “certain steps” that are “precisely” how they recovered from their illness.

“Working the Program”

What does it mean to “work the steps” or “work the program”?

The AA Big Book is the comprehensive exposition of the Steps. It was written:

To show other alcoholics precisely how we have recovered is the main purpose of this book. (AA forward to the first edition)

In the experience of those early AAs:

Those who do not recover are people who cannot or will not completely give themselves to this simple program... If you have decided you want what we have and are willing to go to any length to get it—then you are ready to take certain steps. (AA p. 58)

That “simple program” and those “certain steps” that are “precisely” how they recovered from their illness.

The Big Book describes several alternate “programs” of recovery that some of them tried before discovering the simple 12 Step program. Read the following passages and stories and identify those ineffective “programs” of recovery. 

Bill W: AA 7 (self-knowledge)
Various alcoholics: AA 31.3, 34.2 (will-power)
Jim: AA 35-37 (controlled drinking)
Man of 30: AA 32-33 (will-power)
Fred: AA 39-43 (self-knowledge, will-power)

How successful were these alternate “programs”?

What would those “programs” look like in the context of Sexaholics Anonymous?


An Overview of the “Simple Program”

The sexaholic is powerless over lust, and lust has made his life unmanageable. To survive, he must get free from lust. But if he does not have the power within himself, and self-knowledge, will-power, moderation are not effective, he will need some outside Power to free him. What method does this Power use to rescue the sexaholic? By the 12 Steps of Sexaholics Anonymous! What follows is a overview of the steps and their significance.

1. We admitted that we were powerless over lust-that our lives had become unmanageable.

The Diagnosis

Every problem has a solution, every illness a treatment. If you misdiagnose the problem, then you will attempt to apply the wrong, ineffective solution and may even make the problem worse. So it is imperative to properly diagnose the problem.

Step One is the diagnosis. We may have thought the problem was a moral one, or lack of self-discipline or self-knowledge. But we now understand that we have an illness that makes it impossible for us to stop acting out on our own. 

The illness can be understood as an allergy. We are allergic to lust.  When lust gets into our system, we have an allergic reaction: we binge on some form of sex, endangering our life in some sense. It’s a two-fold problem: 1) when we get lust in our system, we crave more and more, and 2) we are always obsessed with getting a lust hit.  AA makes it clear that we will never be cured of the craving (what starts when we consume lust). The solution will somehow have to address the obsession of the mind.

Additionally, we acknowledge that the stakes are extremely high: an unmanageable life. We must find a solution.


2. Came to believe that a Power greater than ourselves could restore us to sanity.

The Solution

We may have realized our inability and peril for some time and despaired. But now, seeing others who had been in our predicament enjoying a “happy and joyous freedom” (AA 133.1), we have come to believe that we can be restored to sanity.

And because we have established in Step One that we, like them, are not capable of restoring ourselves, we realize, and come to believe, that there is some power in the universe that can do it for us, a power outside of and greater than our selves.

The hope is for a restoration of sanity. Since problem #1 of the two-fold problem cannot be solved, we will never be able to lust sanely, like gentlemen. But the Power can remove the obsession of the mind (problem #2).


3. Made a decision to turn our will and our lives over to the care of God as we understood Him.

The Decision

So now comes the decision. We now know there is a solution to our problem, and that a Power greater than ourselves has the solution. In Step Three, we decide that we want the solution that the Power provides, whatever requires of us.

If we are to be free from our addictive behavior, we must somehow get free from the obsession of the mind (#2 of the two-fold problem above). As we shall see, that obsession for the relief that comes at once from the drug is necessitated by an ever-present mental state of being “restless, irritable and discontented” (AA xxviii). 

It turns out, the sexaholic is restless, irritable and discontented because the have let their God-given instincts get twisted, as manifested in character defects like selfishness, fearfulness, and dishonesty. In other words, we have lived a life of self-will. And it is that self-directed life that has gotten us into our unmanageable predicament. We’ve made a mess of things. We need to let someone else take charge.

The “will and lives” of Step Three is not our addictive behavior. That’s a given. They obviously have to be relinquished.  Rather it refers to are those instincts of life that have become twisted. I have lived my life governed by fear and selfishness (I did it my way...), now I am deciding I will do it God’s way. 

It is important to realize that the “simple program” does not require some specific understanding of who God is. The only thing required, is that I believe there is some Power outside of myself, and that he has the power to restore my sanity.


4. Made a searching and fearless moral inventory of ourselves.

The Program of Action Begins: Discovering The State of My Will and My Life

A decision without an action is worthless. That is no less true with the 12 Step program. To be content with the Step Three decision is akin to being excited that you have decided to take a wonderful vacation, but have never taken any action to make it happen.

The Big Book makes it clear what is required after the decision: “Next we launched out on a course of vigorous action, the first step of which is a personal housecleaning...” (AA 63.4)

This a critical step in the program! It sheds light on all that has gone before (Why do I have this obsession? Why is my life in shambles?) and provides the raw material for the remaining eight steps (What are my defects of character that I will want God to remove in steps 6 & 7? To whom do I need to make amends in steps 8 & 9? etc.).

Step Four is not an exercise to show what a rotten person I am, but a dispassionate review of the state of my life, taking inventory of Me Inc. Like a shop keeper, I am doing a thorough review of my inventory to see what’s broken and needs to be tossed. I’m uncovering the defective character traits that have been bankrupting my life.

More to the point, what are those aspects about how I have been running my life that are causing me to feel restless, irritable, and discontent which triggers the obsession in my mind to get relief from my drug of choice, the drug which is ruining my life? There is no hope for sanity if I don’t do this “searching and fearless” inventory.

The Big Book provides a very systematic way to perform this inventory. It pays to be thorough in your inventory. 



5. Admitted to God, to ourselves, and to another human being the exact nature of our wrongs.

Checking Our Work



6. Were entirely ready to have God remove all these defects of character.
7. Humbly asked Him to remove our shortcomings.

Reorienting Our Lives

In Steps Four and Five we uncovered the character defects that are at the root of our feelings of restlessness, irritableness, and discontent. This state of mind fuels our obsession to go to our drug for comfort. This is problem #2 of the two-fold problem, the part that can be fixed. Removing the obsession requires, in part, God removing our defects of character. 

In Step Six we have become ready to have them removed, and in Step Seven, we ask God to remove them (shortcoming is synonymous with character defect)


8. Made a list of all persons we had harmed, and became willing to make amends to them all.
9. Made direct amends to such people wherever possible, except when to do so would injure them or others.

Losing the Guilt and Making Things Right

Our feelings of restlessness, irritableness, and discontent are also caused by the guilt we feel for the real harms that we have caused in the lives of those in our life. Making appropriate amends releases us from that guilt. By doing so, we “clear away the wreckage from the past” (AA 164.4), the wreckage that hinders our progress.


10. Continued to take personal inventory and when we were wrong promptly admitted it.

Continuing to Grow

We have never arrived.... Not just maintain, but grow, become more God-directed and controlled

11. Sought through prayer and meditation to improve our conscious contact with God as we understood Him, praying only for knowledge of His will for us and the power to carry that out.



12. Having had a spiritual awakening as the result of these Steps, we tried to carry this message to sexaholics, and to practice these principles in all our affairs.


The Pace of the Steps
Question: How quickly should I work through the 12 Steps? Answer: How soon do I want to be free from the tyranny of my addiction? A journey of 1,000 miles starts with the first step. True, but the destination hasn’t been reached till the last step. And if the journey is to get out of enemy territory where I’m likely to be killed, then a sauntering step is not advisable.

We want to recover from sexaholism. What is required? A spiritual awakening. What is a spiritual awakening?

The terms “spiritual experience” and “spiritual awakening” are used many times in this book which, upon careful reading, shows that the personality change sufficient to bring about recovery from alcoholism has manifested itself among us in many different forms. (AA Appendix II)
 
So it is this spiritual awakening, this personality change, that brings about our recovery. What do we have to do to get this spiritual awakening? Step Twelve answers:

Having had a spiritual awakening as the result of these Steps, we tried to carry this message to sexaholics, and to practice these principles in all our affairs. (AA 60.1)

To summarize, the steps bring about the spiritual awakening, and the spiritual awakening brings about recovery. So how quickly do I want to take the steps?

Listen to how in the pages of the Big Book the suffering alcoholic is urged toward the spiritual awakening through admonition and example: 

The Big Book illustrates the program with the story of its founder, Bill W. Read “Bill’s Story” and notice his pace: Steps 1&2 at his kitchen table one night, followed by 3-8 during his subsequent stay in the hospital. As soon as he is released from the hospital, he dives into helping other alcoholics, step 12.
In explaining the move from steps 3 to 4: “Next we launched out on a course of vigorous action… [our decision] could have little permanent effect unless at once followed by a strenuous effort” (AA 63, 64)
For step 4: get rid of defects “promptly” (AA 64)
Step 5: after deciding who will hear our 5th step: “we waste no time” in sharing it (AA 75)
After Steps 6 & 7 have been taken: “now we need more action, without which we find that ‘faith without works is dead.’” (AA 76)
Step 10: begins even while working 8 & 9: “We vigorously commenced this way of living as we cleaned up the past.” (AA 84)
Step 11: Having begun to be “God-conscious”, “we must go further and that means more action.” (AA 85)
Step 12: “But this is not all. There is action and more action.  ‘Faith without works is dead.’” (AA 88), remember that Bill W. and many of the early AAs were 12 stepping early in their recovery: it was vital to their sobriety (AA 15)

How would you describe the walking pace suggested in the Big Book? Does this seem wise? Why or why not?


The Sexaholic’s Allergy/Toxin
The substance that is toxic to the alcoholic is clear: alcohol in any form. It is a toxin that is easily recognized. What is the the toxin that the sexaholic is allergic to?

You see, I'm a sexaholic, a recovering sex drunk. That's like an alcoholic, only the drug is sexual lust instead of booze. (SA 9)
I was extremely allergic to lust all along but never knew it. (SA 11.2)
Lust has become an addiction. Our situation is like that of the alcoholic who can no longer tolerate alcohol and must stop drinking altogether but is hooked and cannot stop. So it is with the sexaholic, or sex drunk, who can no longer tolerate lust but cannot stop. (SA 202)
We admitted that we were powerless over lust-that our lives had become unmanageable. (SA 204)

There are lots of kinds of alcohol, and they are all easy to spot. The many manifestations of lust, on the other hand, are often difficult to recognize. But because it is deadly to the sexaholic, it is vital to be able to recognize it in all its forms and to treat all manifestations, big or small, as poison (AA 157.6) or a hot stove (AA 24.3).

Some manifestations mentioned in the White Book:

The pattern was that even though I was having sex only with my wife and had withdrawn from feeding lust at other times, I was still resorting to memories of pictures or past encounters to achieve arousal and orgasm. (SA 21)
Turning my head as if sex-starved all the time, Erotic fantasies, Use of erotic media, Obsession with the romantic-going for the "chemistry", The desire to make the other person lust (SA 43)
There can be no relief from the obsession of lust while still practicing the acts of lust in any form. "I can be masturbating to the image of a blank wall, and I'm still resorting to my drug."... We stop feeding lust through the eyes, the fantasy, and the memory. We stop relishing the language of lust. (SA 64)
Each lustful act or fantasy became another powerful ray penetrating the nucleus of our psyches and loosening the forces that held us together. (SA 83)
When we withdraw from our habits and are able to stay sexually sober for some length of time, we discover that even though we may not be acting out our compulsion, the obsession is still with us, though it may seem to disappear for a time. Lust, as we have seen, assumes many disguises, which we begin to recognize in sobriety as time goes on. For one person, lust may be lusting after someone. For another, it may be the obsession to be lusted after. For yet another, lust may appear as a desperate sexual or emotional need for someone. In any case, it is the inner disposition of the heart that is the real problem, and the work of recovery continues with altered attitudes and gaining progressive victory over lust. (SA 157)
I stopped acting out sexually in any and all forms, including sex with myself and non-marital relationships. There could be no relief from the obsession of lust while still practicing the acts of lust. (SA 158)
This meant eliminating from what was under my control all printed and visual materials and other symbols of my tyranny. I had to stop feeding my lust by looking around, in my use of television, movies, and music; and by using and listening to the language of lust. (SA 158)
But with lust, I had to keep taking mini-inventories, as suggested in the Fifth and Tenth Steps. Whenever I felt some experience, image, memory, or thought was controlling me, as was often the case, I would bring it to the light, talking it out with another program person. (SA 160)
There have been times after doing this when lust has later resurfaced in erotic dreams in such a way that I knew I could act out sexually in my sleep without even touching myself and knowing I had the choice! (SA 166)

For the sexaholic, there is no safe encounter with lust. A “little lusting” for the sexaholic is as dangerous as “a little whiskey in my milk” is to the alcoholic (AA 36.1).

Defining Progressive Victory Over Lust
The White Book identifies lust as “the driving force behind our sexual acting out.” (SA 202) Because lust is always such a destructive force in our lives, “true sobriety includes progressive victory over lust.” (SA 202)

In what sense should this victory be “progressive”? One way perhaps to understand the progression is that I lust some amount today, a little less tomorrow, a little less the next day and so on. But surely that can’t be if lust is the toxin that causes the craving to start. How were we meant to understand “progression”?

A good place to start is hearing from the primary author of the White Book, Roy K.  A talk given by Roy at a New Jersey Marathon, and transcribed in the December 1999 Essay, ("A New Look at Lust Recovery") describes "his own progressive victory over lust". In the essay, he does not describe a "sometimes I do, sometimes I don’t" progression. Rather, he shares how over time he discovered new manifestations of lust in his life. These weren't new in the sense they had never before been active in his life and thinking, but they were new in his awareness. And each discovery was met with a scorched earth resolve.
 
For example, he describes how he discovered lust in his marriage bed, how he found he needed lust in the form of fantasy to maintain arousal with his wife. Lust! He continues by relating that overcoming this newly discovered lust was a long slow process, AKA: a year of abstinence. This lust manifestation was discovered, diagnosed and excised. No mercy!
 
And if the nature of the "progression" described in the article wasn’t clear enough from the examples, he drives home the point in Stage 7:
 
Once I discovered these other forms and strategies of lust progressively, once I was able to see, then I came to deeper surrender. This legitimate use of the word “progressive” is the very process of discovery we’ve been talking about in these various stages. I’ve got to keep progressing; there’s no fulfillment of the promise otherwise. The misuse of our expression “progressive victory over lust” is when we confuse it with our encounter in the moment of temptation, seeing the image in the corner of our eye, for example. In that instant, there is no such thing as progressive victory. We either drink or don’t drink. Think about it. Man, can we ever let our “progressive victory” wording cover a multitude of sins! (Essay, Dec. 1999, p. 6, emphasis mine)
